Okay, so enough of the theory.
Let's start with the practical
and build our very first server.
So what I'm going to do is
I'm just going to close
this particular window.
This was the FS1.
And let me just open the terminal.
So what I'm going to do is let
me just zoom in a little bit.
I should have done this setup
before, but yeah, that's fine.
So I'll just go into my coding
folder and there I have
this node, js thing, right?
And here I'm going to do
mkdir and let's say HTTP server.
Okay, so code the HTTP server.
And here we have RVs code, right?
Let's create a new file that is index
js.
So this is going to be
our entry point file.
Okay?
Now in order to create a server,
you have to use one built
in module that is HTTP.
So this HTTP module
which is again built in.
How do I know built in?
You can see that it's
on the official documentation.
Plus node is there, right?
This helps me to create a server.
So let's try to import it first.
So cause HTTP equals require
and I can just say HTTP.
Fine, then let's create a server.
So how do you create a server?
You can just say HTTP.um.
oh, okay.
Do you see that we are
not getting typings?
So for that, first of all,
I'll just do npm in it.
And interestingly I can just
do an hyphen Y which will
skip all the questions
and go with the default.
Now npm install@ the rate
types/ node.
So this will give me the bindings.
Right now you can see
I have create server.
Okay, so this line
creates a server for me and returns
a server instance.
Now what I can do is I
can take the server and make
it listen on a port.
I can bind this server to a port.
Now what is a port number?
Don't worry, I'll tell you.
So right now just type in 8000.
Okay?
So you can just type in 8000
and then a callback function.
So let's have a callback function.
So if my server successfully sets
up, if my server successfully
tries to listen to this port,
I can just say console.log okay,
that HTTP server is up and running
on port which 8000.
So this is just a successful
callback that if this successfully.
Listens, just give me
this console log.
That's it.
So now you have created
a server which might crash.
Let me just check.
So you can see that,
okay, it's not crashing.
HTTP server is up and running
on port number 8000.
But right now we have not
coded anything right.
So now just do a control C
to halt this server.
So this is basically means as
halt halt Basically means
you have just halted it, you
have just terminated it.
Okay?
So this HTTP createserver takes
in a callback function, okay?
This create server thing
gives you access.
This create server thing takes
in a function and it gives you
access to two things, that is
a request and a response.
The incoming request, and this is
where you can send a response.
So whatsoever user has requested that
will be available in this variable
that what user is trying to access.
For example, this request
will contain the method.
If it is a get method or post
method or patch method.
This will also contain that what
that user is trying to access.
So all the data that is coming
in the request will be
available in this object.
And using this object
we can construct a, response.
So now what I, what else is
in this function?
I'll just say console dot log
that I got an eight incoming
request, very simple, right?
And then I have to return
a response, right?
But let's say I mention I decide
that I will never send a response.
So see, what I'm trying to do is
in this, my request response
cycle, I am basically never
sending a response, which is,
which is a bad thing, right?
Now see what will happen
if I do node index js.
You can see that it is running
on port number 8,000.
Now see, if I go on my browser
and I Type in local host 8000, you
can see that it is stuck forever.
So I am trying to access
in my web browser localhost8000.
And you can see what happened
when I am trying to access this,
my browser is stuck, right?
Why is it stuck?
Because my server has
taken the request.
I got an incoming request,
but there is no response.
Similarly, if I copy this
localhost8000 thing, enter, the.
Then I do enter, then I do enter,
you can see that we are
like getting a request, but no
one is there to resolve these.
So let's send a, response because we
need to complete the cycle, right?
So you can see you got four
requests, but no one is there
to complete this request, right?
So how can you send a response?
So first of all, we
will copy this line.
I'm just copying it from here.
This is the documentation.
So this line sets a header.
Okay?
So we are sending a 200 response.
What is a 200 response?
This is a status code.
So 200 status code means that
it's a success response.
Okay?
As of now you can just
ignore this part.
So I'm just saying, hey,
response dot write at 200
and I will also end a, response.
Finally I'll just end
a response saying thanks for
visiting my server.
That, that's it.
So what I'm doing is I am getting
a request for every request.
I'm just doing a console log.
You can do DB operations, all that.
So all the DB operations,
everything will go here.
And finally you send a,
200 response back to the server.
Every time you make a change
in your code, you have to Rerun
this command that is node index.
Now if I try to visit
this localhost8000port.
Oh, see what I'm getting?
Okay, let me just do
it couple of times.
Every time my server, is returning.
Thanks for visiting my server.
What if I change something here?
Okay, what if I add an emoji?
So what you will notice is
that I'm not getting that
emoji even after refresh.
Why?
Because I have to do a control C.
I have to restart my server
and now I will see the change.
So yeah, in node js you have
to restart the server anytime
you make a change on your code.
And we have tools for that.
Don't worry, that I'll
show you while moving.
Okay, so now your
server is up and running.
You were able to create
your own server.
Let me halt the server.
Now you will see that
it will go away.
So you were able to create a very
simple server using HTTP module.
And yeah, one thing, let's have
the node that makes it more cleaner.
So you created a server.
Okay, so create a server using
this HTTP createserver pass
in a callback function.
This callback function will
run for every request.
This function has access
to request and the response
request is used to see what
the user is trying to request.
Response is used
to construct a, response.
And finally you can just make
the server listen on a particular
port and a success callback.
So if this line is successful,
if your server is up and running
successful, it will just
give you this indication
again, it's an optional thing.
Okay, now what is this port?
Right?
Now what is this port, guys?
In simpler terms.
Okay, I'll just tell
you what is a port.
Let's say that you have
a physical machine.
So when you talk about a server,
first you have
a physical machine, right?
Like your MacBook or anything, right?
Anything.
Your physical machine.
So it's a server.
So your physical machine
is like your house.
Okay?
Your physical machine, it's, it has
like RAM and Something, something.
It is like your house.
Now, on your physical machine you
can have multiple services running.
Multiple services.
For example, there is a service
running, let's say this is
a database service running.
Then there is a, one more service
running, which is, let's say
a Node js application running.
Then you can have one
more thing, okay?
This can be like something else.
So you have different,
different services running.
And these services can listen
on a specific port.
For example, let's say, okay, let's
say that this particular service is
listening on port number eight.
Let's say 3001, okay?
I'm just taking a random port.
Then no other service
can listen on this port.
This service can listen on 3002.
This service can listen
on port number 3003.
Now it's basically like
a room number, okay?
Like you have room numbers.
So these are like room numbers.
Now this physical
machine has an address.
So let's say the IP of this physical
machine is something like this.
So let's say if I am a user, right?
I am a user and I want
to access this service.
So I can say, hey,
on this machine go.
Do you see this?
This is a different one, right?
Go on port number 3003.
So what this will do is,
what this is going to do is this is
your machine address, right
where your physical machine is.
So it will basically route
the request to this machine.
Then you are specifying
the port, right?
You are specifying the port.
This basically means inside
this machine you have to route
the request to the specified port.
So if you say 3003, this is going
to communicate to 3003.
If you say 3001, this is
going to 3001 this way.
That means it is going to go
in this service, so on.
So when I said localhost, localhost,
basically Means my machine,
my local machine on 8000 right?
Now on my machine I can have a lot
of services running, right?
But I am interested in a service
which is running on port 8000.
That is this one you can even run
on 8001, 8002, 8300.
The only thing is that no
other service should be
running on the same port.
So this is what you're
known as a port, okay?
So that means the syntax goes
like, you have the hostname, then
this, and then the port, okay?
So this is how you access a service
on a particular server.